This video is brought to you by Squarespace,
from websites and online stores to marketing tools and analytics.
Squarespace is the all in one platform to build a beautiful online presence and
run your business.
Check out Squarespace through the link in the description below more on them in
a bit.
In 1922,
Harry Truman sat in his mother-in-law's house in a small town in Missouri
contemplating the failure that had been his life.
He was nearly 40 and behind him lay a string of failed businesses and
unfulfilling odd jobs.
He was close to bankrupts deeply in debt and looked down upon by his wife's
elitist family. Aside from a Bri St ins in the army,
he had never lived outside his one horse town. He was in short,
a bit of a laser,
a man who had failed at life so thoroughly that even John Arbuckle would appear
as an overachieving Hercules next to him.
And yet Truman's luck was about to change in a quarter century.
He would go from small town, nobody to leader of the free world,
another quarter of a century after that.
And he'd be recognized as one of the greatest presidents in American history.
So how did this happen? How did a man,
so singularly unambitious wind up achieving so many remarkable
things.
Well in today's biographics we are charting these strange and
unexpected rise of Hart, Truman.
The nobody who became a, somebody,
You know,
that old saying some are born to greatness while others have greatness thrust
upon them. Well, I,
Harry Truman definitely falls into the latter category born on may the eighth,
1884.
Truman was a poor country boy through and through his parents were a farming
stock, scraping a living on the edge of the American frontier.
When Truman was aged just six, his family moved to independence, Missouri,
small town on the banks of the river that acted gateway to the American west.
It was in independence that the railroads terminated that the wagon trains set
off, even in 1890,
people still had living memories of the settlers who had come through here
seeking goals and freedom.
They also had living memories of an altogether more controversial time when
independence was settled, it was mostly by families from the south.
The town was racially segregated and veterans who'd fought for the Confederacy w
as still kicking around like many growing up at that time,
Truman absorbed the prejudices that these men carried for the rest of his life h
ad freely used racial slurs in private.
But if his fellow Missourians thought Truman was just good old boy,
they'd be in for a shock. When he finally reached high office, as he grew up,
Truman went through all the usual pain we experienced.
He was often shy around girls and sometimes found it hard to befriend other
boys, but Truman's childhood came with an additional dose of misery, age 10.
He contracted diptheria and spent the best part of a year with his arms,
legs and throat paralyzed. By the time he recovered,
the frail near sighted boy had lost whatever interest had held in the outside
world. The rest of Truman's early passed in a steady flow of disappointments.
He tried to become a concert, but he lacked the drive.
He applied to west point to join the military,
but his poor eyesight excluded him.
He enrolled in a Kansas city business college after high school,
but family problems forced him to drop out after just a single term,
back in independence, his father's farm was refusing to turn a profit.
So Truman dutifully gave up on his dreams and went back to Zu to help his
par out. He'd stay on that farm for the next 80 years.
Perhaps the one gleam of light in these trying times was Truman's
relationship with his high school sweetheart, be Wallace,
but even that and sour Wallace's family,
they disapproved of Truman's backgrounds. When he proposed,
she rejected him come 19 seven Truman was a guy he's so used to getting beat
down by life. That it's a wonder he got out of bed in the morning.
So what saved him? What wild events,
PL Harry Truman out of obscurity and set him on the path to greatness for that.
You can thank the wildest event of the mall on January the 19th,
1917 German high command sent a to Mexico known as the Zimerman
telegram. It asked Mexico to join world war. I by attacking the USA,
not being idiots, the Mexicans replied, uh,
no and alerted Washington do Berlin's absurd plan.
It was the beginning of the United States as slow entry to world war I or war
that would ultimately kill over a hundred and thousand Americans.
It was also Harry Truman's ticket to finally escaping small town Missouri
In late 1917 Truman's national guard unit was called up for basic training just
before he left Truman guard,
a hastily scrolled message from a heartbroken best Wallace as saying she wanted
to marry him after all Truman's response was as plain as his appearance.
I don't think it would be right for me to ask you to tie yourself to a
prospective cripple or a sentiment. And with that,
his unit left Missouri military life suited Truman.
He was promoted to captain and took great pride in running the best canteen in
his regiments.
But if you are expecting to hear that Truman just stayed behind the lines and
didn't see action. Well prepare to be impressed.
The unit shipped house in March, 1918,
that August Treeman was thrown headlong into the meat grinder.
That was the Western front through September and into October.
He fought in the bloody mus Sagon offensive.
The only future president to see action, great war.
When he emerged on the other side,
miraculously unscathed Truman had gained his first experience leading men.
He also gained a friendship with a soldier named Pendergast little did Truman
know it, but his connection to Pendergast was going to change his life.
Truman finally made it back to Missouri in may 19, 19 1 month later,
he took be Wallace up on ARA.
And the two of them got married no long after Truman opened a men's clothing
store in Kansas city. It should have been the end of his adventures,
little projects occupy his postwar years,
but there was no such luck into January, 1920,
the sharpest deepest depression in living memory wall up America wholesale
prices plummeted 37% while the us was gripped by the worst single year.
Deflation on record business failures skyrocketed one of those failed
businesses was Truman's clothing store in 1922 deeply in debt Truman closed
the for good.
Then he bear moved in with the parents who never missed an opportunity to remind
treatment of his failings.
This is the moments we opened with the moments when Harry Truman aged nearly 40
took stock of his life and realized it had accounted to nothing. However,
fate was about to come knocking over in Kansas city.
Tom Pendergast was looking for, for fresh meat for his political machine.
The uncle of Truman's wartime buddy Pendagost was also the city's democratic
boss. A guy who'd corrupted the entire state with his ruthless machinations,
but while he was corrupted,
Pendagost also liked to use men who were personally honest to give himself some
cover men like his nephews, world war I buddy Harry, a Truman that same year,
Tom Pendergast contacted Truman and made him an author.
We don't know the exact terms,
but we do know that Truman was suddenly installed as the local judge of east
Jackson county. From there,
the future president set about awarding fat contracts to Pendagost allies.
But while Truman's time with Pendagost was certainly dodgy.
It wasn't corrupt. Although he played the game and did,
as his boss asked Truman also took his new job seriously on Truman's watch.
Local government in Jackson county became more efficient. It wasted less money.
Truman himself was scrupulously honest just as Pendagost had hoped. In fact,
Truman was such a good little car in the Pendagost machine that come 1930
Pendergast was ready to promote him.
He asked the former farmer how it feel about becoming a Senator, just like that.
Harry Truman found himself on his way to Congress.
When Truman arrived in Washington on the 31st of December, 1934,
his asked did not go unnoticed.
Pendergast goons had stuffed ballot boxes to get Truman through his Senate
primary. And it was widely thought.
The new Senate was just a puppet of the Kansas city boss.
Indeed Truman's nickname on Capitol hill was the Senator from Pendergast,
but Truman refused to take the bait he carried on as he had in Jackson county
diligently and with great personal integrity had this Pendagost connection,
not been widely known.
It's unlikely that anyone on Capitol hill would've ever linked the two this soon
turned out to be extremely fortunate in 1939 justice Truman's first term
was ending. The federal government came rolling into Kansas city.
Tom Pendagost was arrested and jailed and his political machine was destroyed.
This left Truman in a precarious position. It only won his Senate seat.
Thanks to Pendagost.
Did he have the political skills to win a second term by himself? Well,
as it turns out, he nearly didn't in the,
the bruising 1940 primary Truman squeaked,
the democratic nomination for his seat by a mere 8,000 votes.
This meant relying heavily on urban areas,
including urban areas with large African American populations from 1940 on
Truman would have a lasting reputation as a big city. Liberal,
still Truman was returned to Washington and this on him.
He was determined to make his mark Truman's.
First term had been marked by muted support of whatever was popular in Missouri,
like FD R's new deal or Bill's backing American isolationism.
His second term though saw Truman suddenly become a vocal champion of re
retirement.
It's like Truman knew America was already destined to enter the war Europe and
he was going to use it to his advantage in March,
1941 treatment approached Franklin Roosevelt's just then embarking on his
record.
Breaking third term treatment told the presidents that he was worried about the
military wasting money and recommended setting up a panel to investigate
spending FDR basically shrugged and said, sure,
why not that in auspicious start was how the Truman committee was born running
from 1941 to 1944.
The Truman committee became famous across America like a superhero accountant
whose superpower is being really, really good at accounting,
Truman combed through every expense, noting every penny over three years,
he saved the government billions of dollars.
This Anthony not so subtle side effect of separating him from his pentagons
past.
Once the us entered the war in 1941 Truman's pen bushing came to be seen as
patriotism ensuring money that would've been wasted went towards fighting
Hitler. The, a arts was that Truman reached 1944,
no longer known as the Senator from Pendagost,
but as a respected centrist Democrat,
this was unbelievably good timing. In 1944,
the Democrats were trying to decide their ticket for the upcoming presidential
election while there was no doubt, FDR would be the headline act. Current VP,
a guy called Henry A.
Wallace was considered to left wing to be allowed to run again.
So party bosses essentially went to FBI and said, look,
we're gonna replace Wallace deal with it. Do which we'd love to imagine.
FDR would say something like, sure, whatever. Get out of my office.
I have a war to win in that moment. The fate of these two men were sealed.
Henry Wallace was destined to be pushed out of the corridors of power and
Truman. Well, Truman was suddenly destined to become presidents.
Now you might not be running for office,
but if you were you'd need a website and R recommends building that website with
Squarespace, how's that for a transition. So look a couple of things.
Maybe you've got an idea for some sort of business knocking around in your head.
Well, the only way to figure out if that business,
if that idea is something you should pursue is getting it out there to the
world. And this can be daunting because you know,
it's kind of scary to go and pursue new things, but well,
not knowing how to set up a website, shouldn't be an excuse. I,
and there are no excuses available with Squarespace.
Squarespace allows you to create a powerful website, whatever you're up to.
You wanna sell something online? Yes.
It's easy to set up a store with Squarespace or you wanna do a podcast. Well,
yeah, support it as well. What about a YouTube channel? Well,
obviously you wanna have the YouTube channel on YouTube,
but you need a website to compliment that look nice,
some professional and all that.
It starts on square space with a beautiful template that you can customize until
your heart's content or start from scratch or move over from an existing
domain. Then you just go through this customization.
Processs it's all super easy. And once you've done that,
your website's up and running. There's nothing afterwards. There's no patches.
There's no tech nonsense you have to deal with is all very easy.
And Squarespace also handles all the websitey stuff like I say, podcasts,
but they also do mailing list, social integrations,
all of that websitey stuff that sounds confusing is just made easy with
Squarespace. It's also 24 7 customer support in case you get confused,
but you probably won't so head to squarespace.com for a free trial.
And when you're ready to launch, go
to.com/biographics and you'll save 10% of your first purchase of a website or a
domain. And let's get back to it.
The 1944 democratic convention was unconventional to say the least as
party bosses descended on Chicago, Henry A.
Wallace got wind of his replacements and he began kicking up a huge stink
Truman. On the other hand,
discovered that he was in the running to BEP and did everything in his power to
wiggle out of it.
But there was nothing he could do to stop his staff from rising at the
convention. The anti Wallace faction was strong enough to bring the peed down,
but it was too weak to get their own one elected.
So everyone settled on Truman as the compromised candidate. And finally,
after two bruising days, the man from Missouri wound up on the ticket.
Absolutely no one was happy with this Truman didn't want to be V FDR
didn't want him to be deep.
And everyone at the convention had somebody that they would rather see as
the vape yet. It didn't matter. Come November.
FD R's wartime record saw him a handsy beat Republican candidate, Thomas Dewey,
and suddenly Truman was the vice president.
It was a role that he would hold for barely 80 days. On the afternoon of April,
the 12th, 1945, Harry Truman was summoned the white house. It,
it was a curious order to receive in his entire time.
As VP Truman had barely seen FDR barely been let in on plans for his fourth
term, as Truman arrived at the white house, Alan Roosevelt came out to meet him.
Harry.
She said the president is dead Truman later said he felt as if the moon,
the stars and all the planets had fallen on me.
He collapsed into a big leather chair in the cabinet room,
waiting for the chief justice to come and swear in his presidents.
As others arrived at the white house,
the enormity of it all sank in America was at war.
Although that war was in its end game,
the political giant who guided the nation through its darkest hours was gone
in his place was a small town man who wore it,
not for a quirk of fate would right now be managing a men's clothing store
in Missouri.
One cabinet member later recorded looking at Truman and thinking he looks like
such a little man.
He didn't mean in literal terms at the press conference announcing Truman's
Ascension to the presidency. People were shocked.
One BBC journalist later recorded reporters saying, my God,
what have we been landed with?
You could tell Truman was thinking along similar lines that day,
April the 12th Truman became the 33rd president of the United States almost
immediately.
He was thrown in at the deep end Truman's first months in office were the kind
prospective presidents of nightmares about barely had his first press conference
ended.
Then he was having to sign off on arrangements for the first ever UN meeting in
San Francisco. Only weeks after that,
he was desperately helping to arrange Germanys unconditional surrender.
It was a whirlwind of work overseeing the ends of a war that had raged on for
it was also about to get so much harder. Although Germany is surrender,
it ended the war in Europe. The war in the Pacific was still raging.
It wouldn't be long before the new president was called upon to make the most
controversial decision any president will ever make
For as long as people talk about Harry Truman,
they'll talk about his decision to drop two atomic bombs on Japan.
Was it a war crime?
Was it an atrocity or was it a proportionate response to a racist militaristic
nation that was refusing to surrender? Whichever side you are wrong?
The basic facts are there faced with estimates of up to far life hundred
thousand dead in an invasion of Japan,
Truman authorized nuclear strikes on August the sixth,
the little boy bomb dropped on Hiroshima ending 80,000 lives.
The next day Truman went on TV and declared that if the Japanese do not now
accept our terms of surrender, they may expect a reign of ruin from the air.
The line of which has never been seen on this earth. Two days later,
the Fatman bomb landed on Nagasaki killing 40,000 on August the 15th,
1945. Ember Hirohito announced Japan's surrender. World war II was over,
but while one war was winding down, another was lumbering interview.
The following spring, 1946 Truman joined Britain's wartime leader,
Winston Churchill on stage in Missouri there,
the former prime minister gave a speech in which he warned of an iron curtain
descending across the continent of Europe today.
The iron curtain speech is seen as the opening salvo in the cold war.
Not only did it galvanize Western opinion to the USSR,
it also pushed Truman to make his own major speech on March the 12th,
1947, Truman stood before Congress and declared.
I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free
people's who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or
by outside eye pressures.
I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies
in their own way. It was the beginning of the Truman doctrine,
the American policy of containing Soviet expansion.
And it would set the tone for the entire 20th century.
One positive side effect came just a year later. Secretary of stage George C.
Marshall proposed a plan to rescue Europe's shattered economies and Truman
embraced it as a way to stop the communist advance from spreading Westwood
signed into law on April the third, 1948,
the Marshall plan would totally rebuild Europe,
but the Soviets were all to aware of its secondary anti communist aim,
and they weren't going to leave such a provocation unanswered on June the 24th,
1948. The USSR suddenly blocked all roads and rail lines into west Berlin.
At the time some 2 million people lived there in Irelands of allied Ruit and
ocean of Soviet administration in Washington.
The Hawks in Truman's cabinet urge the president to declare war to take the for,
to the Soviets.
But for someone who would garner a reputation as a warmonger Treeman was
remarkably restrained.
He ordered supplies to be flown into west Berlin for as long as the blockade
remains known as the Berlin airlift,
the operation would become one of the biggest logistical feats of the 20th
century at its height.
One plane was landing in or taking off from spur in every 30 seconds,
bringing clothing, food, water, medicine,
and basic supplies for an entire city.
It was a grand's achievement all the more so for not spiraling into world war
three. By the time the Soviets lifted the blockade in the spring of 1949,
there was no longer any doubting what was happening.
Any lingering hopes of reproachment with the communists was over the cold
war was officially on
By rights treatment should have ended.
His first term riding high had overseen the end of world war II helped rebuild
Europe overcome the Berlin blockade,
issued an executive order desegregating in the military and made the us the
first nation on earth to recognize Israel.
But rather than a winner Truman marched towards his first election,
a badly damaged loser in 1946,
the midterms had resulted in a Republican wave sweeping Congress as the 1948
election approach.
The Democrats liberal winged jump ship to campaign for Henry A.
Wall progressive party upstairs the party big wigs had begged DWI di Eisenhower
to replace treatment as the democratic candidate. Finally,
the Southern Democrats also abandons the party to vote for STR Thurman's Dixie
KRAS as an November, 1948,
approached a victory for Republican Thomas Dewey seemed certain nevermind that
Truman spent the fall doggedly riding trains from town to town across the
nation,
making fiery speeches to crying the do nothing good for nothing Republican
Congress nevermind the vast crowds that turned up to Truman's whistle.
Stop tours. Chaning give them hell Harry. None of it mattered.
Polls all said that Truman was toast.
As the Chicago Tribune prepared its presses.
The editors were so sure of a Dewey landslide that they printed the front pages,
reading Dewey, defeats Truman.
We can only hope that there was plenty of humble pie to go around that news
stream. On November 3rd, 1948, America woke to the news.
Harry Truman had won a second term.
Not only that he trounced Dewey, the Dixiecrats had collapsed.
The progressive party was nowhere to be seen when Truman picked up a copy of the
Chicago Tribune and waved at reporters of vast grin on his face.
An iconic moments in politics was made come January Truman returned to the white
house. Following first televised inauguration in history immediately,
he got to work transforming the country, or rather he tried to get to work.
Despite pulling off the political upset of the century treatment found his hands
tied in his second term by a democratic Congress that hated his guts.
When he tried to pass his fair deal legislation,
which would've brought in swaths of new.
So programs benefiting African Americans.
It got so watered down that there was almost nothing left,
but Truman's second term was never faded to be remembered for its domestic
agenda.
Instead it would be events on a peninsula 11,000 kilometers away that decided
how history saw Harry Truman on June the 25th,
1950 north Korean troops poured over the 38th parallel invading South Korea.
It was the beginning of the Korean war,
a war that would kill millions and leave scars that remain to this day.
It would also be the war that ended Harry Truman's career.
Few wars have ever been as costly and as pointless as Korea world war,
I may have been a freak accidents that blew up in everyone's faces,
but at least it had an outcome. The collapse of the old European order,
Korea by contrast,
started with a communist backed state and an American backed state facing each
other across the 38th parallel.
And it ended with a communist act state and an American back state facing
each other across the 38th parallel.
The worst part was the chaos that it took to get to the stale mate. At first,
the north overran the south leaving swaths of destruction in its wake,
then Truman dispatched,
general Douglas MacArthur to Korea and the us UN force chased the north back
over the 38th parallel laid waste to their country.
But then the Chinese got involved on North Korea side and forced the Americans
all the way back to where that started. Cities were burned.
Massacres were committed and towns were bombed to oblivion,
but for Harry Truman's legacy,
only one thing ultimately mattered the conduct of Douglas MacArthur.
Although Truman had been the one to send MacArthur to Korea without waiting for
congressional approval. The general soon proved himself to be a loose cannon.
In early 1951, he started demanding that America invade China,
which would've sparked a full war across the,
of Pacific with world war II only just over Truman refused.
They weren't going to go down the road of endless devastation for MacArthur.
This was a Trump decision and he said so loudly. So well,
Truman fired his and well, that was about it. Very Truman.
When he returns from Korea, MacArthur was greeted as a hit arrow.
Truman by contrast saw his Paul's tank.
His favorability ratings dropped to 22% lower than any other post world Wari
presidents,
even Nixon at the height of Watergate didn't fall that low faced with numbers
like that. Truman knew that he had no choice, but to prepare for his retirement.
Although the 22nd amendments had now been passed, the president of two tons,
an exception had been made for Truman as the sitting presidents in another
context, Truman might have gone for a third term.
He might have tried to match chef ER, but with the public against him,
what was the point? Truman bowed out of the democratic primary in March, 1952,
that November Eisenhower led the Republicans to a land line, victory,
even carrying some Southern states when Truman left the white house in January,
the country was glad to see him go only that wasn't quite the end of the story.
After his second term, Truman retreated back to independence, Missouri,
and set about tending to his legacy.
He'd always said it done his damnest even when he was unpopular and over time,
people came to believe him. Maybe it was the legacy of his fair deal,
which wounds up being enacted in another form by Lindon B Johnson,
maybe it was the memory of the man who'd ended world war II or his undoubted
touch with the common people or his commitment to civil rights,
even in the face of his party's Southern wing, whatever.
The reason Truman lived long to see his legacy rehabilitate it.
And it was all he could have asked for on Christmas day, 1972,
Harry Truman slipped into a coma and he died the next day at the age of 88.
Today Truman consistently ranks as one of the best presidents in us history in
the same league as Teddy Roosevelt or FDR for a man
seemingly destined to small town obscurity. This is remarkable,
not even Truman thought. He had what it took to lead a nation.
And yet when the time came,
he stepped up and he proved the world wrong all too often,
making videos about the lives of great people.
It involves talking about brain boxes.
So the privilege people with charisma spare,
but Treeman story shows that you don't need any of that.
You can be a 40 year old failure from nowhere and still wind
up changing history.
Some men may be born to greatness and some may have greatness thrust upon
them,
but it's arguable that none of them will ever be quite as great as Harry
Truman the accidental president. So I really hope you found that video.
Interesting. If you did, please do hit that thumbs up button below.
Also support this channel. If you like by supporting our sponsor square space,
I'm gonna link to below and thank you for watching.